Add a blog post about advanced serverside apply (#37110)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/advanced-server-side-apply.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Server Side Apply Is Great And You Should Be Using It"
date: 2022-10-00
slug: advanced-server-side-apply
---

> **Author:** Daniel Smith, Google

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Author:** Daniel Smith (Google)
```

Server-side apply (SSA) has now been [GA for a few releases](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/08/06/server-side-apply-ga/), 
and I have found myself in a number of conversations, recommending that people / teams in various situations use it. 
So I’d like to write down some of those reasons.

> ## Obvious (and not-so-obvious) benefits of SSA

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
## Obvious (and not-so-obvious) benefits of SSA {#benefits}
```

A list of improvements / nicities you get from switching from various things to Server-side apply!

> * Vs client-side-apply (that is, plain `kubectl apply`):

Reviewer: Please write out “versus” long hand.

* Vs GET-modify-PUT:
  * (This one is more complicated and you can skip it if you’ve never written a controller!)
  * To use GET-modify-PUT correctly, you have to handle and retry a write failure in the case that someone else has modified the object in any way between your GET and PUT. This is an “optimistic concurrency failure” when it happens.
  * SSA offloads this task to the server– you only have to retry if there’s a conflict, and the conflicts you can get are all meaningful, like when you’re actually trying to take a field away from another actor in the system.
  * To put it another way, if 10 actors do a GET-modify-PUT cycle at the same time, 9 will get an optimistic concurrency failure and have to retry, then 8, etc, for up to 50 total GET-PUT attempts in the worst case (that’s .5N^2 GET and PUT calls for N actors making simultaneous changes). If the actors are using SSA instead, and the changes don’t actually conflict over specific fields, then all the changes can go in in any order. Additionally, SSA changes can often be done without a GET call at all. That’s only N APPLY requests for N actors, which is a drastic improvement!

## How can I use SSA?

### Users

> Use `kubectl apply --server-side`! Soon we hope to make this the default and remove the “client side” apply completely!

Reviewer: It'll help to clarify who “we” are here. Eg:
- Google
- Kubernetes project
- SIG API Machinery

### Controller authors

> There’s two main categories here, but for both of them, **you should probably “force conflicts” when using SSA**. This is because your controller probably doesn’t know what to do when some other entity in the system has a different desire than your controller about a particular field. (See the CI/CD section, though!)

Reviewer: Can we hyperlink to the CI / CD section?

> #### GET-modify-PUT/PATCH controllers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Controllers that use either a GET-modify-PUT sequence or a PATCH {#get-modify-put-patch-controllers}
```

> This kind of controller GETs an object (possibly from a watch), modifies it, and then PUTs it back to write its changes. Sometimes it constructs a custom PATCH, but the semantics are the same. Most existing controllers (especially those in-tree) work like this.

Reviewer: Is there a page or section about “watch” that you'd be happy to make the word “watch” be a hyperlink to?

For example, https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/api-concepts/#efficient-detection-of-changes

Author: That works for me, done

If your controller is perfect, great! You don’t need to change it. But if you do want to change it, you can take advantage of the new client library’s “extract” workflow– that is, get the existing object, extract your existing desires, make modifications, and re-apply. For many controllers that were computing the smallest changes possible, this will be a small change.

> This workflow avoids the failure mode of accidentally trying to own every field in the object, which is what happens if you just GET the object, make changes, and then APPLY. (Note that the server will notice you did this and reject your change!)

Reviewer: Avoid writing APPLY in capitals as it is not an HTTP verb. The docs use bold lowercase for logical verbs that aren't in HTTP, such as **watch**.

To get around this downside, why not GET the object and only send your APPLY if the object needs it? Surprisingly, it doesn’t help much– a no-op APPLY is not very much more work for apiserver than an extra GET; and an APPLY that changes things is cheaper than that same APPLY with a preceding GET. Worse, since it is a distributed system, something could change between your GET and APPLY, invalidating your computation. Instead, we can use this optimization on an object retrieved from a cache–then it legitimately will reduce load on the system (at the cost of a delay when a change is needed and the cache is a bit behind).

#### CI/CD systems

> Continuous integration and/or deployment systems are a special kind of controller which is doing something like reading source .yaml files from a git repo and automatically pushing them into the cluster, perhaps after running them through some testing, or waiting for test results, etc. Generally users are the entities pushing changes into the git repo, although that’s not necessarily always the case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuous integration (CI) and/or continuous deployment (CD) systems are a special kind of controller which is doing something like reading manifests from a Git repo and automatically pushing them into the cluster. Perhaps the CI / CD process first generates manifests from a template, then runs some tests, and then deploys a change. Typically, users are the entities pushing changes into the Git repository, although that’s not necessarily always the case.
```

Author: Included most of this but also applied the "source control" from another comment.

> Some systems like this continuously reconcile with the cluster, others may only operate when a change is pushed to the git repo. The following considerations are important for both, but more so for the continuously reconciling kind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some systems like this continuously reconcile with the cluster, others may only operate when a change is pushed to the source control system. The following considerations are important for both, but more so for the continuously reconciling kind.
```

CI/CD systems are literally controllers, but for the purpose of APPLY, they are more like users, and unlike other controllers, they need to pay attention to conflicts. Reasoning:
* Abstractly, CI/CD systems can change anything, which means they could conflict with any controller out there. The recommendation that controllers force conflicts is assuming that controllers change a limited number of things and you can be reasonably sure that they won’t fight with other controllers about those things; that’s clearly not the case for CI/CD controllers.

> * Concrete example: imagine the CI/CD system wants spec.replicas to be 3, because that is checked into source code; but HPA is also enabled for this Deployment, and it thinks there should be 10 replicas. Who should win? We just said that most controllers–including the HPA–should ignore conflicts. The HPA has no idea if it has been enabled incorrectly, and the HPA has no convenient way of informing users of errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Concrete example: imagine the CI/CD system wants `.spec.replicas` for some Deployment to be 3, because that is the value that is checked into source code; however there is also a HorizontalPodAutoscaler (HPA) that targets the same deployment. The HPA computes a target scale and decides that there should be 10 replicas. Which should win? I just said that most controllers–including the HPA–should ignore conflicts. The HPA has no idea if it has been enabled incorrectly, and the HPA has no convenient way of informing users of errors.
```

* Of course, sometimes SRE makes an accidental change, or a dev makes an unauthorized change – those you do want to notice and overwrite; however, the CI/CD system can’t tell the difference between these last two cases.

Hopefully this convinces you that CI/CD systems need error paths–a way to back-propagate these conflict errors to humans; in fact, they should have this already, certainly continuous integration systems need some way to report that tests are failing. But maybe we can say something about how humans can deal with errors:
* Reject the hotfix: the system admin observes the error, and manually force-applies the manifest in question. Then the CI/CD system will be able to apply the manifest successfully and become a co-owner. (Optional: then the system admin applies a blank manifest to relinquish any fields they became a manager for.)
* Accept the hotfix: the author of the change in question sees the conflict, and edits their change to accept the value running in production.

> * We can also imagine the CI/CD system permitting you to mark a manifest as “force conflicts” somehow– if there’s demand for this we could consider making a more standardized way to do this. A rigorous version of this which lets you declare exactly which conflicts you intend to force would require support from apiserver, but in lieu of that, you can make a second manifest with only that subset of fields.

Reviewer: I was expecting a different conclusion: the CI/CD system can observe which fields have a different manager (for example, HPA) and can then choose to cede control of that field. I believe SSA has a capacity for this.

The CI/CD system could have hard-coded expectations of which fields (such as `.spec.replicas`) to willingly cede, but other mechanisms are possible (some examples: heuristics; annotations; CRDs).

Up to you if you want to mention this, and a mechanism to surface those warnings / errors is still useful.
Might be worth mentioning that if the CI / CD mechanism is also specified via the Kubernetes API, then reporting a condition via the `.status` of that custom resource object could be useful.

WDYT?

Author: Sure, I didn't say anything about that since it's not actually very easy for clients to do right now, but I guess this is supposed to be "advanced" 😅

I will edit

Author: I added something, see what you think.
